### Role stereotype classifiers

[↑ back](/README.md)

Our journal paper [Role stereotypes in software designs and their evolution (JSS vol.189)](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2022.111296) describes our effort to classify (Java) classes into role stereotypes. But first: **Role stereotypes** are abstract characterizations of the responsibilities of the building blocks of software applications (e.g., classes). [Rebecca Wirfs-Brock](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q967529) introduced the following six role stereotypes: **_Information Holder_**, which knows information; **_Structurer_**, which maintains object relationships; **_Service Provider_**, which offers computing services; **_Coordinator_**, which delegates tasks to others; **_Controller_**, which directs other’s actions; and **_Interfacer_**, which transforms information. While these stereotypes were introduced in a “forward” way during design, we instead apply this notion retroactively—given the source code of a class, which role stereotype best describes it?

The original classifier was constructed by performing machine learning on static features of the class' source code. In his master's thesis, [Ka Yip Fung](../../../../Mboopi) improved the accuracy of the classifier by including dynamic features acquired by the means of run-time profiling. He extracted the features based on the call tree generated by [JProfiler](https://www.ej-technologies.com/products/jprofiler/overview.html).

Potential uses of/open research questions regarding role stereotypes:

- We believe there are typical interaction patterns between role stereotypes. Known design patterns can also benefit from this notion, e.g., strategies are Service Providers hidden behind an Interfacer. This role stereotype information may then counts as “crumbs” of architectural knowledge within source code.
- We believe role stereotype information can be used to fine-tune smell detections. For example, the threshold of how many attributes a class should have must be different between an Information Holder and a Service Provider.
